---
layout: post
title:  "Closure"
author: Bhushan Goel
categories: [ Javascript ]
tags: [JS]
image: assets/images/js.png
description: "Javascript closure explanation"
featured: true
comments: false
---
[Interview Questions](#interview-questions)

An act of function which remembers its `lexical scope` in which it gets created is known as a closure.

A closure allows a function to access and manipulate variables that are external to that function.

> It allows a function to access all the variables, as well as other functions, that are in scope when the function itself is **defined**.

The closure isn’t just a snapshot of the state of the scope at the time of creation, but an active encapsulation of that state that we can modify as long as the closure exists.

### A simple closure

```javascript
var outerValue = "car";

function outerFunction() {
    console.log(outerValue === 'car');  // true
}

outerFunction();
```

### Another example

```javascript
var outerValue = "car";
var later;

// outer scope:START
function outerFunction() {
    var innerValue = "bus";

    // inner scope:START
    function innerFunction() {
        console.log(outerValue === "car");  // true
        console.log(innerValue === "bus");  // true
    }

    // inner scope:ENDS

    later = innerFunction;
}

// outer scope:ENDS

outerFunction();
later();
```

`innerFunction` here can not be invoked directly because its scope is limited to the `outerFunction`. So, we need to invoke `innerFunction` using `later`.

See, how `innerFunction` which gets invoked at some later point in time, can access the variables\(`innerValue`\) that were present at the time of its definition.

When we declare `innerFunction` inside the `outer function`, not only is the function declaration defined but a _closure is created_ that encompasses the function definition as well as all variables in scope at the point of the function definition.

## Uses of a closure

* mimicking private variables
* using with callbacks

<hr>
### Interview Questions

##### Q1. What is wrong with this piece of code?

```javascript
for(var i=0; i<5; i++) {
    setTimeout(function() {
        console.log(i);
    })
}
```

[Solution here](js-interview/closures-1.md)

##### Q2. How can you re-write the above code to make it work as expected?

##### Q3. How can you create variable in JavaScript so that no other function can modify them?
Sol 3: With the help of a closure, you can create private variables in Javascript
